# politics-manifesto
General premises and intentions for why we exist.

The premise of Recycle Ithaca's Bicycles is to be true to the idea of a closed circle.

We take responsibility for, and make use of, everything we have. Only what we can't use do we discard, but even those things we make sure get put on a course away from being wasted. We make shop fixtures from broken parts. We keep old inner tubes for use by local craftspeople. We use scrap lumber for our workbenches and shelves. Nothing is waste, everything has some purpose. A lot of reuse requires clever thinking, developing and engineering methods to make use of what we have. We use these techniques in what we teach with our participants, and participants use them in what they teach with each other, which they can then apply to their daily lives. If something breaks in your home, is it garbage? No - you can fix it. And if you can't, you can repurpose it, or transfer it to somewhere where it can be utilized as a resource, rather than just adding to a landfill that burdens and potentially toxifies an ecosystem.

Recycle Ithaca's Bicycles is an environment and an entity with activism and cross-struggle solidarity in it's DNA. While the environment of RIBs focuses primarily on preservation and reuse of bicycles and sharing of knowledge (and therefore power), the overall entity considers that agendas of movements concerned with building sustainable, fair, ecologically balanced systems and ending abuse and unjust oppression, including oppression of earth's natural ecosystems, are fundamental to informing its ethics and policy. Some might, at a glance, wonder if these observances are out of scope, considering the bicycle is a machine. What do ideological movements have to do with a machine?

A bicycle holds a rare place among humanity's inventions; once made, it requires little in the way of further natural resources to fulfill its function. The only fuel it burns is the energy of the rider, and compared to other vehicles, it's construction uses a minimum of natural resources and materials. Cyclists also benefit from expending their energy, with increased cardiovascular, muscular, and mental health. The bicycle is not disposable - its primary components can, if properly tended, perform their functions for multiple human lifetimes.

Relatively little money is required to maintain a bicycle, and relatively little space. Bicycles, in most places, do not require a license or insurance to operate, and yet are fully privileged vehicles, free to use every street, trail, and road. Bicycles are simple enough for anyone to understand, and complex enough that the process of understanding them will educate the observer in enduring principles of design and physics applicable to devices and machinery at large. Add to this that even to the present day, the bicycle has been calculated to be the most mechanically efficient land vehicle ever invented.

However, in common use, the bicycle as a paradigm often falls short in terms of ecological responsibility, because there is one missing link: when someone loses interest in their bicycle, whether because it breaks and they can't fix it, or because they just don't want it anymore, they often simply throw it away, or neglect it until it becomes rust. Reusing, maintaining, or rebuilding a bicycle makes it even more powerful as an ecological device. Reuse can multiply all the positive properties of the bicycle. It completes the circle.

In short, the bicycle, along with a shared environment for maintenance and reuse, is a working, physical schematic for equilibrium, for ecological responsibility, for egalitarianism, for efficiency, for erosion of class boundaries, for education, for liberation and exponential empowerment without undue destruction, for freedom. It is one of the few devices to answer so many of humanity's needs and desires at so little cost. And all of these principles are contained in a form that has not diminished in its pure exhilarating fun for over a hundred and twenty years, and counting.

So, in many ways Recycle Ithaca's Bicycles sees, in the bicycle and the DIY shops which support it, a hint at answers sought in the machinery of our own society. Struggles ignored by massive governmental systems and deeply biased social and economic gatekeepers can and are assisted easily by the bicycle and it's other well-built, well-designed, human-powered cousins.

Recycle Ithaca's Bicycles creates an environment where the knowledge of these principles is extended to as many people as possible. We add another link to the circle of sustainability - we empower individuals to maintain their own lives, to become smarter, more capable people, and to understand the ethics of environmental responsibility. Bicycling engages the rider more closely with their environment and their community. Working on bicycles together expands the circle, adding value to the community.

For Recycle Ithaca's Bicycles, awareness of abuse and unjust oppression, and the radical, liberating, creative, beautiful and balanced systems required to offset or end abuse and oppression, are one and the same as studying and understanding the nature of the bicycle and supporting and enhancing its use and reproduction.

When you're out riding your bike, and you pass other people in the street on bicycles, that's the community coming together in respect for the earth. Since RIBs began thirty years ago, literally thousands of people have shown up to learn how to recycle, upcycle, and reuse bicycles, and how to fix and maintain their own bicycle and help others do the same. That is the community coming together not only in respect for the earth, but to stand for taking action and maintaining it.
